I made this for Prue. I just need to find
my favourite dish to serve it on.
[Sandi] Noel?
-Sandi?
-[Sandi] I'm in here.
-Er, Noel?
-Sandi?
-[Sandi] In here.
-[chuckles]
Do you sleep in the cutlery drawer?
Don't be silly,
I sleep on a washing up sponge.
I use the cutlery drawer to do my diary.
-Shall we start the show?
-[laughs] Okay.
[both] Welcome to
The Great British Baking Show.
You haven't seen
my favourite dish, have you?
Oh, I'm really sorry.
It ran away with the spoon.
[sighs]
[Sandi] Wow, that's dark.
-This time, it's the quarterfinals...
-[groans]
[Sandi] ...and pastry week...
If you don't get good lamination,
you're screwed.
Hot damn.
[Sandi] ...with a Signature bake...
Don't know whether to tip it all out
and go again.
[Sandi] ...which turns everything
on its head.
[Alice] Really soggy.
[Sandi] A mystifying Moroccan Technical...
You can't be putting wallpaper paste
on a plate.
[Steph] Oh, no.
[Sandi] ...and a towering Showstopper.
This is so stressful.
[Sandi] ...where it's not just the pies...
I can't get it to hold.
[Sandi] ...teetering on the brink.
[David] Can all crash down.
I don't know what to do.
Me neither.
[theme music playing]
[indistinct chatter]
Quarterfinals. What!
Pastry week. There's gonna be
a bit of muddling through.
I'm really not a pastry person at all.
I've got really warm hands,
which is nice for healthcare,
not so good for pastry.
It doesn't like to be handled,
it doesn't like to be warm.
It's not a pleasant thing to deal with.
I just don't like pastry.
Morning, bakers.
Welcome back to pastry week
and your Signature Challenge.
Today, the judges would like you
to make a tarte tatin.
Your tart can have
any flavours or toppings,
but it must be savoury and not sweet,
and must use full or a rough puff pastry.
'Cause when the going gets tough,
the pastry gets rough or... full puff.
-I don't really know what I'm saying.
-[all chuckle]
Your tart must have good lamination,
which is a Beach Boys song.
[Sandi] And be perfectly baked.
You have two-and-a-half hours.
-On your marks...
-Get set...
[Sandi] Bake.
An article I read about apple tarte tatin
said that the pastry is superfluous.
It's all about the filling.
That will not fly here.
Tarte tatin isn't something I'd go for.
Erm, but if I did, I definitely would opt
for a vegetarian one.
I don't think
I've ever eaten a tarte tatin.
This week, eaten quite a few.
[Prue] A classic tarte tatin
is made with apples or pears.
You put the pastry
on the top of the frying pan,
and then you turn the whole thing out.
[Paul] What they've gotta do
is create a savoury filling.
They can use cheese, onions, mushrooms.
They can use whatever they wish.
Oh, yes!
But if they add too much liquid
to the tarte tatin,
it will soak down
and really give it a soggy bottom.
[Prue] The key to a perfect tarte tatin,
savoury or sweet, is the caramelization.
You need that pie to look
golden and delicious.
[Paul] I wanna see a light, flaky,
golden-brown pastry.
The weather is quite warm today,
so utilising the freezer today,
I think, is gonna be critical
to get the good lamination in there.
[vocalising]
♪ Good lamination ♪
[Sandi] The bakers could choose to make
either rough or full puff pastry,
but all of them have gone for rough.
[Rosie] If there was time,
I'd do full puff.
I could try and do it,
but it wouldn't go as well.
You know, that's just not a clever move.
[Sandi] Rosie's filling her tarte tatin
with shallots and aubergines,
and using black garlic to add
extra flavour and colour
to her rough puff creation.
What's full puff?
Full puff is when you've got
a slab of butter
that you bash out with a rolling pin...
-Okay.
-...stick it in the middle,
-fold in, roll, fold, roll, fold.
-And what's rough puff?
-You can rub it so it's in smears.
-[Noel] Okay.
Then keep rolling it or grating butter
in between the layers. It's quicker.
This is a minute I'll never get back.
-Bye.
-[snorts]
Today is a rough puff pastry,
'cause it's hot in here,
and working with a big old sheet of butter
was too risky.
[Steph] This is the frozen butter
that I've grated.
And then folds create the lamination.
[Noel] Without those delicate layers
of butter and dough,
instead of light and flaky,
their pastry will be flat and claggy.
[David] It's all about
the lamination today.
If you don't get good lamination,
you're screwed.
[Henry laughs]
[Sandi] With their pastry in the freezer,
the bakers can turn their attention
to fillings.
I mean, look at the size of this thing.
-Hi, Henry.
-Hello, Henry.
Right, tarte tatin.
I am doing a crab,
new potato and tomato tarte tatin.
-Ooh! Nice.
-[Prue] Good Lord.
-Good choice.
-That's a good reaction.
[Sandi] Henry's topping
his tomato and potato tarte tatin
with a seafood salad.
And it's not just his crab
which is well-dressed.
-Can we talk about your tie at this point?
-Would you like to?
You do know we're in
for a heat wave, Henry?
It's quite hot.
-You can always loosen it off.
-Yeah.
I could. I may not.
[all laughing]
-[Paul] Good luck.
-Thank you very much.
It's really hot.
[Sandi] Steph's taking a more
dressed-down approach to flavours.
[Steph] I think cheese and onion
go well together.
It's classic. And I tried
putting tomatoes in there as well,
and it just didn't work, so...
I've stuck to my guns.
[Sandi] For her pared-back filling,
Steph's gone for the tried-and-tested
combination of shallots and goat's cheese.
Well, it sounds very simple,
but it could be absolutely delicious.
I love goat's cheese.
You're not mad about...
[Steph] Oh, dear, that's a shame.
I'm not over the moon with goat's cheese,
but it's okay. It's not bad. Erm...
-Is that what you wanted to hear?
-Oh, great.
I'm starting on the right foot.
[Sandi] In her bid to impress the judges,
Alice is going all-out on design.
[Alice] What I'm doing is,
I'm creating, like, a lattice of leeks,
erm, on the base of my pan,
so that when you flip it over, you
should get that nice criss-cross pattern.
[Sandi] Under her woven leeks,
Alice is also incorporating goat's cheese,
and a nod to the origins of tarte tatin.
This is a Granny Smith apple.
Generally tends
to not disintegrate as much.
I just don't want it to be soggy.
That would be the worst thing.
They'll be on it if it's not perfect.
[David] I'm doing
a caramelly carroty tart.
And then some walnuts
to give a bit of a crunch.
In Bulgaria, we just go to the hills
and pick them.
And these ones were actually picked
by my partner's grandma.
She went up into the hills
and picked these ones.
[Sandi] His nuts may be a treasured gift,
but one of David's ingredients
would normally be thrown in the bin.
Carrot tops?
So, I'm keeping the pie reasonably dry
so that the pastry stays nice and crisp.
I'm doing a carrot-top pesto,
so I use the tops as well.
I'm also making a whipped sirene,
which is...
Er, it's a Bulgarian cheese
which is very similar to feta.
[Prue] Did you bring it from Bulgaria?
-I've never seen that in England.
-No, I had to try and find it
from a shop yesterday in London.
I couldn't order it online.
[Prue] All these ingredients
sound delicious.
Whether they'll be delicious all together,
-we will see.
-Yeah. Thank you.
[Alice] It's heavy.
[David exclaims]
So this is the second roll,
and then one more after this.
[Alice] Rectangle, fold like a parcel,
and that helps create the layers.
I'm not an expert at this.
Don't tell Prue.
Look at that!
[Noel] Tarte tatin filling
should melt in the mouth,
but retaining the moistness
whilst preventing soggy pastry
is a fine balance.
[David] So, they're roasted
just till they're soft.
If you want your pastry to be crisp,
you actually want the filling
to be as cold as possible.
So, I'm doing everything separately
and then building it in this
while it's cold.
[Henry] In practice, it's always been
a bit soggy, my tarte tatin.
So, I'm just gonna fry a few potatoes,
so they're crisp.
And they will hopefully act
as sort of a barrier.
No-one wants a soggy tart. No-one.
[Sandi] Lobster arm-wrestling.
-[groans]
-Oh, wow.
-Oh, you've broken me.
-No, cracked. It's a lobster.
[groans]
-Too weak to do the time call?
-You're gonna have to do it.
Okay. Bakers, you are halfway through!
Halfway through!
[Noel] The bakers will only achieve
an attractive golden-brown top
to their tarte tatin
if they can marry a well-made caramel
with an appealing design.
[Alice] So, it's just butter and honey.
This should help the leeks
kind of go nice and caramelly.
Over, under, over, under.
Weaving my leeks is
just what I do, you know?
[Henry] Right, construction begins.
I've got ten minutes to do this in.
So, I've got a caramel with ginger,
lemon zest and sumac, then the carrots.
The judges will see what's underneath,
so hopefully
they'll just basically see the carrots.
[Rosie] So, I'm gonna caramelise
the vegetables in there.
The pastry goes on top of that,
and it goes in the oven.
So, the pattern I'm putting them in now
is the end pattern.
[Alice] These leeks have gone very soft.
This could all go wrong, and I've got
only myself to blame if it does.
[Rosie] It's like there's
too much butter in it.
I might have put too much butter in it.
I don't know whether to tip it all out
and go again,
or whether... I don't wanna do that.
I think we've got to a point
where I'm happy with the caramelisation.
Fried potatoes
over the top of the tomatoes,
just so there's a bit of a barrier.
[Rosie] I'm just trying to remove
some of the extra liquid,
in a totally normal manner that
I was hoping no-one was gonna see.
Paul came over and was like,
"Don't like goat's cheese."
I was like, "Oh, good."
-Oh, okay. Good start.
-I'll be using that. Yeah.
And I'm guessing
you're using goat's cheese.
Yeah. And then, "It's simple."
Ah, but, you see,
so there's a Danish word, "enkel",
and it means
"beautiful through simplicity".
-Simple is fine. I'm quite simple myself.
-Okay...
-Actually, not as simple as Noel.
-Well, yeah.
-That's like taking simple...
-That's another level.
-...to a whole new level.
-Yeah.
[sighs] This Salvador Dali
mobile phone's not working out.
Bakers, you've got 45 minutes left!
[Henry] I need
to put it in the oven right now.
It's like a pizza.
Black garlic is sweet and strong.
It's really good.
But it means the whole thing is dark,
so when they come over and go,
"Looks burnt,"
I'll say, "It's black garlic."
Now I'm rolling it out.
Just to be, like, my final roll.
It should take 30 to 40 minutes,
but I need to give myself that leeway.
I don't wanna be like,
"One minute left,"
and I'm still trying to flip it out.
It's going on as quickly
as is physically possible.
The longer it's out here,
it's just melting and not cooking.
[Henry] Okay, it's in.
[Steph] I'm just gonna do a couple more...
Just to allow some steam to escape.
[Alice] It needs go in the oven ASAP.
That'll do.
[Sandi] They won't achieve
the tricky trinity
of crisp, flaky pastry, moist filling
and golden topping...
Ah, go.
...unless they are spot-on
with their temperatures and times.
[exhales sharply] Oh, dear.
Putting it in for 20 minutes at 180,
and then 20 minutes at 160,
so turning it down.
So, it's gone in at 190.
It's gonna go for 20 minutes at that,
and then I'm gonna drop it to maybe 180.
Nothing I can do about it.
Right. So, go for 20 minutes
and see what it looks like.
I mean, it's in.
Steph, it won't be doing anything yet.
[David] This is the pesto
with the carrot tops.
I'm gonna whizz that with olive oil.
I'm going to make the crab salad
for the top,
which is really fun and easy to do.
[Noel] Alice, what the hell are you doing?
I'm just checking.
My pastry's gone in the oven.
Everyone's worried about soggy, right?
What, a soggy bottom?
-Soggy middle.
-Yeah.
-Worse than bottom?
Worse than a bottom.
You just don't know if it's done,
you don't know what it's doing.
Until you turn it over,
you just don't know.
You can only see the top layer, you
don't know what's happening underneath.
[Noel] Are you wearing
a wet tea towel as scarf?
Right, Mother Teresa.
[Noel and Sandi laughing]
Bakers, you have five minutes.
-[comical sad trombone sound]
-Really?
[alarm beeps]
About now. I'm too scared.
I think the pastry could be
a little bit soggy under there.
Four minutes, thirty-one. [sighs]
Waiting is the worst bit.
[Alice] It's just not cooking,
so I'm gonna have to drain...
I don't know if any of that...
It's gonna come off.
It's just super sog.
Right, I'll give it another three minutes.
[Henry] This has to be done.
And I need time to get all this malarkey
on top as well.
It's got layers.
I'm gonna leave it a couple of minutes
in this before I turn it out.
[Steph] I've seen conflicting theories
about this tin-leaving time.
-Just gonna leave it, like... a minute.
-[timer beeps]
At one and a half, it's coming out.
[Alice] It's just really soggy.
It's getting the last five seconds.
I'm hoping to see it not collapsed.
Now it's just coming out whatever.
It's nice and crispy on the top,
but who knows about the bottom?
It's the turning out I'm scared about.
Bakers, you have one minute,
just one minute.
Erm...
[Rosie] Stuck?
It's not horrific. It is what it is.
[Henry] Yes.
Hot damn.
[Rosie] Yay.
It didn't stick.
Ta-da!
[humming]
[Alice sighs]
[Sandi] Bakers...
Your time is up.
Okay.
That doesn't look too soggy.
[Sandi] Please place your bakes...
[Noel] At the end
of your work stations.
Benches.
There's sog,
but little can be done about that now.
[exhales heavily]
[Sandi] The bakers' savoury tarte tatin
will now face the judgment
of Prue and Paul.
-Hello, Henry.
-Hello.
[Prue] I actually like the crab on it.
It's very original.
I've never thought of that.
The sides look okay.
The layers look pretty good.
I'd like to have seen more caramelisation
on the potatoes.
I can't turn this over,
there's so much on it.
Let me turn over one of these.
-Nice colour underneath.
-[Prue] Nice pastry.
Nice lamination.
You can see the pastry very well.
Your flavours are delicious.
Oh, thank God.
A little hint of...
Is that chilli in there?
There's a bit of chilli and dill
in the crab.
[Paul] Beautiful.
If somebody had said to me,
"This is what Henry is going to do."
I'd have said, "Tell him not to."
-But I would have been wrong.
-[Sandi laughs]
-[Prue] It's delicious. Well done.
-Thank you.
-Well done, Henry.
Cool.
[Paul] The layers look pretty good.
[Prue] The layers look excellent.
The burnt bits, though, not as much.
So, these are purple carrots.
Oh, they're the carrots. Okay.
[Sandi] If anything gets burnt,
just say it's purple.
But it isn't the most attractive thing
to want to eat.
-Yeah.
-[Paul] Right.
-Cuts well.
-Smells great.
[Paul] You've got a nice flaky base.
[Prue] Yeah, and crisp.
Can I have a little bit of that?
[David] Yeah. Just with it,
'cause it's quite dry.
-[Paul] Very dry, actually.
-[Prue] It needs the sauce, but...
it shouldn't be saved
by the sauce, really.
-We're judging the tarte tatin.
-[David] Hmm.
Your flavours are beautiful,
but it is very dry.
-I'm just gonna take a burnt bit.
-[David chuckles]
-Not burnt.
-[Sandi] Not burnt, purple.
[Prue] Well, I love the lattice.
It's very clever.
I'm a little disappointed
it doesn't look caramelised.
-Yeah.
-[Paul] The layers you can see...
I'm not sure about
how the texture's gonna be on this.
-Although we did get a nice...
-[Sandi] Sounds all right.
...crispy bit there.
Nice.
[Paul] It's a nice colour underneath.
You've got a little soggy line
running down there.
You can taste the honey
and it's lovely with the butter.
It is very delicious.
I love the apple and the leeks together.
The leeks melt in your mouth.
I just think it's too wet.
If you got a bit more colour on that...
-Yeah. Yeah.
-...you would have nailed it.
-Thank you.
Whew.
Erm...
I'm not sure about the goat's cheese
plonked on top like that.
[Prue] It looks like an add-on,
doesn't it?
Yeah.
[Paul] It cuts well.
Not very thick. Very thin.
[Sandi] Is that for me?
Very nice flavour.
The sweetness from the shallots
really comes through.
The caramelisation is great
because you got this slight toffee.
Goat's cheese does work well with it,
but I would have liked
to have seen it inside.
-Sorry, yeah.
-It is a bit thin, the pastry.
But I think the flavour
can't be argued with.
-Thank you.
-[Sandi] Thanks, darling.
That's lovely.
[whispers] It's all right.
The flavour comes from
a red wine and balsamic reduction
with black garlic and chilli.
That's where the colour comes from.
I think it's partly where
the colour comes from.
-It looks a bit charred.
-[Rosie] Okay.
It's nice and thick.
-[Paul] It's a bit wet underneath there.
-[Prue] There are some layers.
-They are layers, but--
-But they are a bit soggy.
Ooh, this here, there.
The majority of it is quite wet.
I did make a mistake.
I put in twice the amount of butter
when I was doing my caramel,
-so everything was wet at the top.
-[Prue laughs]
[Paul] Right.
[Prue] Quite a lot of garlic.
You have to have friends around
who like a lot of garlic.
But that is a very soggy bottom.
[Sandi] It's like a membrane.
-[Paul] Thank you, Rosie.
-Thanks.
It's never been like that.
[Henry] There's been
a fair bit of muddling through,
but, yeah, that went... really quite well.
I didn't expect it to go that well.
[David] Yeah, it was a bit dry.
I mean, the sauces were meant
to make it not so dry.
Paul didn't wanna taste those.
But that's okay.
[Rosie] Gutted about that.
Dreading the Technical, 'cause, yeah,
another chance to make more soggy pastry.
Yay!
[Noel] The bakers could practise
their tarte tatins,
but they have no idea what they'll be
making in the next challenge.
Right, bakers, welcome back
to your Technical Challenge,
always everybody's favourite.
Today, it's been set for you by Paul.
Any words of advice?
Consistency really matters
in this challenge.
As opposed to any other challenge. Right.
-Is he finished?
-[Sandi] I think so.
As ever, this Technical Challenge
will be judged blind,
so I have to ask these two
gorgeous specimens to leave the tent.
Off you pop.
-Where are they off to today?
-Paul's having a yard sale.
Well, he does have a lot of old slippers.
That's fair.
Anyway,
for your Technical Challenge today,
Paul would like you to make a Moroccan pie
using warqa or brick pastry.
-[whispers] What?
-We have no idea.
Basically, you need to make
12 very thin sheets of warqa pastry,
whatever that may be,
wrapped around a perfectly spiced filling
to form a pie.
That's all there is to it.
Hey, kids, you've got
two-and-a-half hours.
-On your marks...
-Get set...
Bake.
Right.
Never heard of "warqa pastry".
I mean, I'm guessing it's filo... ish.
No, I haven't heard of this.
What is this?
If anyone has heard of this,
I will get naked.
I'm that confident.
I know what this is.
I've seen it on a travel programme.
-Moroccan pie, Paul. What is it?
-Yeah.
-It's a bit like making filo mince pies.
You've got layer on layer
on layer on layer,
and you build it up
and you put your filling in,
then you fold over the top.
But it's made with warqa pastry,
or brick pastry.
-Yeah.
-And this is the difficult part.
-The warqa pastry is quite a loose batter.
-[Prue] Mm-hmm.
It's made on a hot plate.
You have to put it on with a brush,
but if it's too thin,
as they're brushing it on,
it'll just disintegrate.
If it's too thick,
it'll act like a pancake
and just be like a splodge.
You won't be able to brush it around.
[Prue] And the mixture is chicken
and obviously a lot of spices.
Yes, but we haven't told them
how much of the spice to use.
The warqa pastry is crispy,
it's delicious,
and it's solid enough to hold
everything together in a slice.
That is so Moroccan.
You put it in your mouth
-and it's Marrakech.
-Hmm.
I mean, look how thin it is.
I don't envy them at all,
and there's a heat wave going on.
Would we have given this challenge
knowing the weather was gonna be
-as hot as it was?
-You would.
-Absolutely, yeah.
-[laughs]
I'm just not gonna rush this
because there's so much stuff
on this sheet of paper.
"For the pastry, mix together the flour,
semolina, salt, lemon juice and olive oil.
Then add the water."
You don't want it to be too thick
'cause you're not gonna be able
to get such a thin layer.
"Place a flat pan," i.e. that,
"over a pan of simmering water."
"Paint the batter thinly in circles
until the whole pan is covered
in a layer of batter."
I don't get it.
I might just try one and see what happens.
[Alice] Oh, gosh.
I feel like this isn't right.
What are you doing now?
-Explain to me.
-I have no idea what I'm doing.
Surely you can't be putting
wallpaper paste
-on a plate on top of a pan?
-This is grim. I don't know.
What is going on? What is it... [sighs]
[Alice] The first one
was quite thick, actually.
Trial and error.
[David] That's the idea,
but I obviously want it to be thicker.
[Steph sighs] Don't get it.
My pan was too hot,
so I've reduced the temperature
and it's now a bit easier.
These look a bit better, these.
I don't know why
I didn't do this thicker beforehand.
It was clearly the better thing to do.
[Rosie] I'm not sure I'm doing this right,
but something is forming.
Getting there.
It says we need to make 12.
[Steph] I don't see how it's wrong.
Like, I followed the...
[Steph sighs]
[sobbing] No.
This is one of my biggest fears,
not being able to present something.
-[whispering] Steph, you can do this.
-Okay.
-So, don't worry.
-Thank you.
-It looks so difficult.
-It's grim.
[Noel] Keep going.
I'm just gonna take a different approach.
I'm potentially going to survive
the situation.
[chuckles]
[Sandi's voice] Bakers,
you are halfway through.
Sandi, you need a shave.
You're starting to look like Adam Hills.
Actually, it's a good look for you.
Pretty sexy.
[Rosie] "For the filling,
heat olive oil in a pan
and add seasoned diced chicken
and cook through."
I've never cooked chicken before.
This is not how I usually cut my meat.
My meat is usually alive.
[Steph] So, let's get this in.
I'm adding the ras-el-hanout now.
[coughs]
It's got chilli in it.
Do you think that's
too far gone for a chicken?
Would you able to get
that chicken back on its feet?
-Probably not.
-No.
[sighs]
[Steph] "Add the onions and garlic,
the harissa paste,
fennel seeds, cumin seeds,
ginger and cinnamon."
Obviously they haven't told us
how much to put in.
I've gone for a teaspoon of everything.
It does smell good.
Well, I don't really like
that much spicy things.
I'm trying to work out
where that heat is coming from...
Oh, and it is the harissa paste.
[coughs]
I don't think it needs any more.
[muffled] Bakers, you have half an hour.
-Want one?
-I'm fine, thanks.
Ten, eleven, twelve.
We're not gonna get 12 of these things,
white warqas.
More batter, more batter.
Looks like a warqa to me.
It's Arabic for "sheet".
-And you are making really sheet pastry.
-[chuckles] Yes.
-Thank you.
-So, crack on.
Right, so,
"Lay one sheet of warqa in the tin
so the edge sits
in the middle of the tin."
[Steph] "Continue lining
with the other seven sheets..."
"Seven"?
All of that in there?
[David] I don't think so. That's too much.
So I guess we fill the tin.
It doesn't say, "Don't fill the tin."
[Noel] You can't still be doing that.
The time for that has gone.
It's well past.
We now need to do some business
where you put this...
-in there...
-On that.
Foldy-foldy.
-[chuckles]
-Goddamn it.
[Steph] "Fold the overhanging warqa
over the filling scrunched up
so the warqa has some texture."
I think these are too thick. Ugh.
If they want a bit of texture?
Look at that.
In the oven.
And I have no idea how long
it's gonna go in there for.
It just says "bake".
I'll check it after 20 minutes.
Won't bake in that.
[Steph] Isn't that beautiful?
Not.
[Henry] I'm now having
to get a bit of a move on.
[vocalising]
[sighs]
[Henry] I think this has just
got to have to do now.
I'm going in, you don't worry. No choice.
[groans]
[Alice] I'm gonna have to leave it
till the last minute.
[Rosie] The worst case would be,
when I come to take it out,
it goes... "nyeh"
[sighs]
[David] Henry.
-[exhales]
-[Steph] Where did he get it from?
-A lime tree.
-[Noel] I wanna be in on this.
[all laughing]
[Alice] Ow!
Has everyone forgotten that
we've actually got to get them out?
Bakers, you've got five minutes,
so stop mucking about.
Let's have a look.
Ugh. I don't know
how much longer that needs.
Well, it's far from baked.
Oh, shit.
When they say "a minute", it's coming out.
[Rosie] I don't want to drop it.
[sighs]
[Alice] Don't know if it's right or not.
[Steph] It's gonna be shocking.
This is really grim.
Ooh.
[sighs]
Bakers, you have one minute left.
[Henry] Come on, boy.
[Steph] Oh.
[sighs]
[inhales sharply]
If I can't get this out in seconds,
kill me.
Ah!
[Alice] Come on.
[exhales sharply]
[Henry] Shit.
Absolute carnage.
I don't wanna take it out of the tin.
Oh, my God.
It's leaking juice everywhere.
Oh, dear.
[sighs] Bless her.
[Rosie] Oh, bugger.
[Sandi] Bakers, your time is up!
Please place your Moroccan pies
behind your photographs.
[chuckles]
[Sandi] Paul and Prue are looking
for Moroccan pies
with a well-cooked,
perfectly-spiced filling,
and crisp, unsplit warqa pastry.
Let's start with this one. This one...
-[Prue] It's a little misshapen.
-[Paul] There's been issues.
-[Paul] It's burst.
-[Prue] Yeah.
-That was probably on there...
...and it's been put down there.
If I'm guessing.
-[all laughing]
-I think you're probably right.
I can't see any base there at all.
It's just filling.
-It's quite sharp on the spices...
-[Prue] Mm.
...but I quite like that.
[Prue] Yes, it's got good flavour.
Very nice,
-but it does look a bit of a mess.
-[Paul] It does.
Moving on to number two.
Again, it's broken up a lot.
They've struggled with
the warqa dough in the first place.
Wow, that's difficult to cut.
-There is a base to it, though.
-[Prue] Hmm.
The pastry is a bit thick,
and therefore a bit tough and undercooked.
-I like the filling.
-Filling is delicious.
Filling's very good.
This one, they've struggled
with the consistency of the warqa pastry.
-The whole thing's just collapsed.
-[Prue] Mm.
Lovely and crisp.
There is definitely a base on there.
-[Prue] Quite mild flavoured.
-Hmm.
[Prue] This is much neater, this one.
[Paul] It is neater. It's pretty solid.
But I'm really impressed with the top.
You've got a nice folded look.
It's quite soggy when you get down
to the bottom layer.
A lot of garlic.
-[Paul] Spicy as well, innit?
-I think there's too much garlic.
Moving on to the last one.
Great colour.
It's crispy.
Nice.
Good base on it as well.
That it is holding so well together
when it's really very hot...
-It is.
-...is excellent.
It's lovely.
[Sandi] Prue and Paul will now
rank the Moroccan pies from worst to best.
Okay, in fifth position was... this one.
-Whose is this?
-That's me.
Henry, you struggled
a bit with the warqa pastry,
and more colour would have been better.
In fourth place, we have this one.
The filling tasted absolutely delicious,
but it needed longer.
In third position is this one.
Whose is this?
Not bad.
The whole thing
came together quite nicely.
And you do have
some strong flavours in there.
Did you go overboard with a few?
Garlic, maybe?
-Maybe, yeah.
-I think Prue picked up on.
And then in second place...
we have this one.
-Whose is it? Rosie.
-Mine.
And there was some debate about it
because it exploded.
But, you know, Rosie,
your pastry was so excellent,
and so flavoursome,
and the filling tasted so good.
-Thank you.
-We thought it should be second.
Which means first place...
Yes. Finally!
All round, it was pretty good.
You had some thin pastry,
but you managed to layer it up
so you couldn't see it.
It was solid, had a strong colour
and the flavours were good.
-Well done.
-[Alice] Finally.
-Finally first.
-Well done.
Finally got first place.
[clicks tongue]
Just eight tries.
I don't know how I got away with that.
[laughing] My pie exploded.
But, yeah, awesome.
I'm just relieved
to have got through that one.
I was a bit flaky, wasn't I? Silly me.
At the moment I feel a bit like
Jesus did on Maundy Thursday,
awaiting... crucifixion.
[Noel] The bakers have
one last chance to impress
in the Showstopper Challenge
before Paul and Prue decide
who is Star Baker
and who must leave the tent.
I do not know where we are.
Henry, brilliant Signature,
lousy Technical.
David, you thought it looked like
he'd burnt the carrots,
-but then he came first in the Technical.
-[Prue] I know.
We're in the same situation as
we've been in the last couple of weeks,
where they've literally just reversed.
So, it all relies
on the Showstopper again.
Alice may be in a bit of trouble.
Rosie... Possibly Henry's
in a little bit of trouble as well.
I have to say, his Signature...
My lunch was delicious.
[laughing]
-Who would've thought...
-You're just here for the free lunch.
Who would've thought of putting crab
on top of a tarte tatin?
Your eyes lit up when he said that.
[Sandi] Rosie,
I keep thinking she's in trouble,
and then she manages
to kind of get herself out.
I have no idea at the moment
who's winning, frankly.
[Paul] It's so tight.
They've got to create
a little bit of magic.
Semifinal week, next week.
Their nerves may well
come into play today.
Morning, bakers.
Welcome to your Showstopper Challenge.
Today, Paul and Prue would like
you to make a stunning vertical pie.
Vertical pie? Crazy.
What's next, a horizontal quiche?
-I think all quiches are horizontal.
-Oh, yeah. Good point.
Move on, shall we?
Paul and Prue would like you to make
a large pie base
with decoratively-shaped pastry,
arranged vertically,
supporting at least two further pies.
Your fillings can be savoury or sweet,
and you can use any pastry you like.
-But not each other's.
-No.
[Sandi] No. You've got four hours.
-On your marks...
-Get set...
[Noel] Bake.
I'm just gonna make loads of pastry
and get it chilling in the fridge.
[Steph] Pie's not at all my thing.
I don't know why I've never had
a massive penchant for a pie.
I think everyone's feeling the pressure
with this Showstopper particularly.
[Prue] This is a fairly crazy idea.
It's a vertical pie.
What we mean by that is
they have to make a minimum of three pies
stacked on top of each other.
[Prue] They can be just
boringly stacked,
but I'm hoping they'll be more
interesting than that.
[Paul] Whether it's shortcrust
or hot-water crust,
the choice of pastry is critical.
[Prue] The pastry needs
to be thin enough to be delicious,
and firm enough
to hold the whole thing together.
[Paul] The flavours
have gotta be there as well.
Too much liquid in their filling
can seep down.
We wanna be able to put the knife through
and cut a wedge out,
and let it all hold its shape.
This challenge has to be difficult.
We're looking for the four best people
to go into the semifinal.
Morning.
-Morning, Alice.
-Good morning, Alice.
Alice, tell us all
about your vertical pie.
So, I'm making a tree trunk out of pastry,
which is gonna support a pie on top,
and then the tree house
made of pie.
-And a swing, hopefully, that can...
-Perfect.
-...kind of swing in the breeze.
-[Paul] Wow.
[Noel] Alice's swing,
three apple and blackberry pies
and the hollow tree trunk supporting them
will all be made from
crumbly shortcrust pastry.
You have shortcrust, which is
gonna have to be quite thick
-to support a pie.
-[Alice] Yeah.
So, it's quite heavy,
and I really hope that it stays.
Erm... yeah. [chuckles]
Sounds like I could live in it.
-You could live in it.
-I could live in it, yeah.
Well, with a ladder.
I'm making a ladder. There is a ladder.
A pastry ladder.
[Noel] Ladders aren't the only things
being scaled in the tent today.
[David] I'm doing, erm, a fish pie.
My theme is based on Whitby,
the town I come from,
'cause that's a fishing port,
but also it is an old whaling town.
[Noel] His nautical Showstopper
may be full to its shortcrust brim
with fishy flavours,
but there's one traditional feature
of a pie David is throwing overboard.
Is there a reason why you haven't
got a lid on any of your pies?
N-- No.
[stammers] I really like...
[Paul] What makes a pie a pie?
Well, true,
'cause a pie is the lid, isn't it?
-Because normally in the past you've...
-It can be.
...had a tin with a lid on top,
and a tart would be underneath.
-So it's an open pie?
-Yes, it's an open pie.
[Sandi] If they overwork their shortcrust,
or don't rest it for long enough
in the fridge,
it can become tough and rubbery.
I want this chilling
so that I can make my filling.
[Sandi] All the other bakers are using
hot-water crust pastry,
which they'll prepare later,
as it needs to be shaped while warm.
In the meantime,
they've started on their fillings.
[Steph] So, this is just some
chopped chillies.
These are all going into the curry.
When I was really young,
the first thing I ate was...
Maybe not the first thing,
but I was a bit of a curry girl
when I was younger.
So, goes back
to my childhood a little bit.
[Noel] Steph's also revisiting
childhood with her design,
a three-tier fairground carousel
complete with delicately-painted
pastry horses.
I just saw somebody get married
and have a carousel at their wedding.
-Oh, that's very cool.
-It's a good shout, isn't it?
-That's almost worth getting married for.
-Well, exactly.
-Not quite.
-I mean, no.
[Noel] Steph's not the only baker
hoping to curry favour with the judges.
[Rosie] This is
for the curried vegetables.
Mild, really.
My husband doesn't eat
anything spicy at all.
I'm slowly converting him.
I put a little bit more chilli
in everything I do.
[Noel] Even Rosie's husband Lewis
has approved the spicy vegetable filling
for her pie tower.
A tree, birds' nest pies
and a Camembert dragon
will complete her ambitious
fairy tale design.
Rosie, how many pies all together?
Nine pies?
-Nine pies.
-Nine pies!
-[Rosie] Yes.
-Are you gonna finish this on time?
Yes.
-Have you practised this?
-Yes.
Have you done all of it?
[stammers] Yes-ish.
[Paul laughs]
-Henry.
-Hello.
-[Sandi] Morning!
This is obviously a savoury pie, then.
This is pretty savoury, this bit.
-Did you just steal some ham?
-Oh, yeah.
Do you want some ham? There's so much.
Yes, I'd like a piece of ham.
-Stop this, Paul.
-[Henry chuckles]
-Here, here.
-Stop it, you lot.
Henry... Stop it, you two.
-Yes, my darling.
-Henry, could you explain
your vertical pie to us.
I'm doing a sweet and a savoury.
-Oh.
-It's gonna look like a chandelier.
Hopefully. Or reminiscent of a chandelier.
[Noel] Henry's upside-down chandelier
will consist of four pies.
Two chicken, ham and chorizo,
and two spiced chocolate and pecan.
So, what's the connection
between the sweet and savoury pies.
[Henry] They're nice flavours.
-With the cinnamon--
-Who says?
My mother's palate.
-Don't you dare...
-Never...
I won't mess with your mother.
No, no, that's fine. Good luck, then.
-Thank you, Henry.
-[chuckles]
[Noel] Sweet or savoury,
the judges will be expecting
moist fillings packed with flavour.
[Alice] The Granny Smith are quite sharp,
but you've got the caramel,
which makes it nice and sweet,
so it should all balance really nicely.
-[Sandi] That looks fabulous.
-[David] It is incredible.
-[Sandi] Is it from Whitby?
-No, but it could be.
Was it fun growing up there?
Did you go "yay"?
It was fun when you were really young.
Then as a teenager,
you go through the thing of like...
"We're in the middle of nowhere."
There weren't quite the clubs
that you were looking for.
No, definitely not the ones
I was looking for.
-Fair enough. [laughs]
-[chuckles]
I've got 15 minutes to get these pies
in the oven, and that is actually doable.
Do you like meaty pies?
Or can you go overboard, do you think?
[chuckles]
[whispering] It's the eyes. It's the eyes.
It's like a shark...
but with even less mercy.
[Sandi] Even if they think
their fillings are in hand,
Steph, Rosie and Henry
still have their pastry to worry about.
[Henry] There's lard and butter.
[gags]
That's so much fat.
Hot-water crust's a dough
you can knead a lot more
than standard pastry.
As it cools down, it goes brittle
and you can't use it,
so you have to use it straightaway.
[Sandi] Whatever their pastry,
if it's too thick,
the bakers risk an uneven bake
and raw dough.
Too thin, and it may be too weak
to support their structures.
[Alice] It's all about balancing
the structural integrity of the pie.
Gotta hope that it all holds together.
I am really nervous, actually.
Feel like I've caught the sun a bit.
-You are a tiny bit red.
-Oh.
Bakers, you are halfway through!
Halfway through.
Ooh. I'm worried about timings now.
[Steph] This is the base pie.
Probably a bit behind,
so... a bit flustered by that.
[Henry] In the recipes I've read, it says
to put this piping nozzle in the top,
but this piping nozzle's
going directly into meat fillings.
Don't know how the steam goes through,
but I'm doing it.
[Sandi] With multiple pies
of different shapes and sizes,
achieving the perfect bake
will test the bakers' skill and stamina.
I am doing so much.
I always do so much.
So, it's going in for an hour and ten.
[Rosie] Two in the oven...
many to go.
Right, I just need to get...
[inhales sharply] my last pie...
in the oven.
[exhales heavily]
-You're doing dragons, aren't you?
-One dragon.
-Just the one.
-One dragon?
Just one? Has it got a name?
Yeah, he's called Bert.
-Camembert Bert?
-Yeah.
-Bert the dragon. [chuckles]
Unicorns, rainbows, dragons...
Paul's all over that stuff.
Why don't any of you just do a sports car?
What's wrong with you?
[Henry] This is for the pecan pie filling.
I'm going to get the filling ready,
do the decorations.
I can do that in an hour and a half
if I work fast.
Bakers, important Noel announcement.
[Noel] You have one hour remaining!
[exhales heavily]
I thought we had two hours left.
That is not enough.
The, erm...
Oh, that's so not enough time for this.
[beeping rapidly]
[Rosie] Pie marathon, that is.
Pie, pie, pie, pie, pie.
[Henry] Right, they're in.
[Noel] And if perfect pies
weren't tricky enough,
they also need to craft
exquisite pastry decorations.
[Steph] So, these are the horses.
[Rosie] I'm making a tree.
It is a fairy tale tree.
[Alice] So I am making
a tree trunk for my tree house.
I think I'm a little bit mad.
I realised you can make scales
by using the cutter.
[Henry] These are the shapes
which will go around the edge.
The thing about chandeliers is,
you can have them as ornate as you'd like.
So, we'll see how ornate this one gets.
[groans]
That's the rest of Bert.
Okay, Sandi, what I'm gonna do is
I'm gonna throw the sack in the air,
you dive out of it,
do a forward roll in midair and say,
"Bakers, you've got
half an hour left." Okay?
Right, perfect. One, two, three...
[thuds]
Bakers, you've got half an hour left!
Useless.
I think I need to get my pie
out of the oven.
The pies need five more minutes,
but I can't really give them
that five more minutes.
Those actually look okay.
I'm actually fairly happy.
We have no idea, but we'll call it done.
[David] I'm happy enough with that.
-Can you hold the glass?
-The glass? Yeah, I've got the glass.
[Henry] It will come off,
there's just something...
-I don't know what to do.
-Me neither.
So, that's worked.
[sighs] Right.
[David] Definitely lost the portholes.
[Alice] I just freaked out then.
Phew! Ha!
Important Sandi announcement.
Bakers, you have ten minutes!
I always want an hour to assemble
and I always have ten minutes.
Whoo!
[Rosie] There we go.
[Henry] This is gonna act
as a little stand.
[David] These waves are strong enough
to hold it up.
A dragon with a head.
This is so stressful now.
[Steph] So they're to just
support the pies.
[Rosie] No dowels, no.
Not for any reason, other than the fact
that I'm stupid, I think.
[Alice] This is the pie of shame.
Boat to put there, then done.
Right, I just need a few minutes
to decorate it.
Bakers, you have just one minute.
[Alice] I've made a little swing.
[David] It can literally all crash down,
but what can you do?
I can't get it to hold.
Erm... [sniffles]
[softly] Oh, for God's sake.
Right, bakers,
that is the end of the challenge.
Ta-da.
[Steph sighs]
That was terrifying.
[Alice] Not perfect, but okay.
[sighs]
Come on.
[sniffles] The whole pie is falling apart.
I'm going home.
[Noel] Prue and Paul will now judge
the bakers' vertical pies.
Rosie, please bring up your vertical pie.
-Shall I come and help you?
-[Rosie] Yes, please.
[Prue chuckles]
This could go badly wrong.
Wow! It's like a...
strange game.
-[Paul] No rush.
-[Noel] Oh, my God.
-[Sandi] Hang on a minute.
-[Rosie] Okay.
Right, which way? Here?
[Paul] I think the design's amazing.
The knight down here, it's been blasted.
[Prue and Sandi laughing]
It's just lovely. It's imaginative.
-Thank you.
-It's very funny, too, which I love.
It's like a nasty giant
attacking a castle.
[laughing]
[Paul] The pastry's too thick
for the size of that.
-Yeah.
-[Paul] It should be much thinner.
The curry flavour is good...
but your filling is very dry
and it's very bitty.
It just falls apart.
I was just so scared of the moisture.
[Paul] Yeah, but it can be
your enemy as well.
-The dryness is probably worse.
-I know. Okay.
[Paul] I wanted to have
a quick look in the dragon.
He's a different filling.
-[Sandi and Prue groan]
-[Prue] Bye-bye, Bert.
[Prue chuckles]
[Sandi] St. George.
[Prue] Mm.
It's very dry, too.
I think the idea, the sculpture of it,
is excellent.
-I think the textures are all wrong.
-Okay.
-[Prue] Thanks, Rosie.
-[Paul] Thank you, Rosie.
[sighs]
The trunk of the tree,
it's very well done.
I think the overall design
with the swing as well is exceptional.
The pastry is tough as old boots.
You've just worked it too much.
I would not say it's tough as old boots,
but it isn't the tenderest pastry
we've ever had.
[Paul] And the filling's quite dry.
-You've taken too much moisture out if it.
-[Alice] Yeah.
[Prue] I very seldom say this,
but I would say there isn't quite enough
sweetness in the filling.
The idea is fantastic, but for me...
it's not quite there.
-Thank you, Alice.
-Okay. Thank you.
Very imaginative.
It's wonderfully intricate
and really interesting.
And it's obviously a big marine story.
You've got that whole idea
of three pies being one story.
I think the design is very good,
the way it's been constructed.
The exposed veg...
I don't really like.
It needs to be more of a lattice thing
to enclose it, for me.
[David] Mm.
[Paul] The pastry could have been baked
a bit longer underneath.
[Prue] Mmm.
Pastry is lovely and short.
[Paul] I think your filling
is slightly over-seasoned.
-I agree, it's a bit too salty.
-[Paul] Hmm.
[Prue] It's the smoked salmon.
And it feels quite dry.
You lost all the moisture
because it's got no lid.
It just blew away.
[Prue] Well, I love it.
The little horses are lovely.
The pastry is properly browned.
The little pastry...
-squares could have been thinner.
-[Steph] Mm-hmm.
And then put on the side.
They're a bit clumsy.
Okay.
[Paul] But it is neat,
and it's very organised.
It's very Steph.
[Prue chuckles] Yes.
[Prue] It's holding together nicely.
Hmm.
Delicious, Steph.
It's not too dry.
Curry flavours are lovely.
[Paul] To get a wall like that,
a filling that's not moving,
and still carry the moisture
and the spices,
it's really, really good.
-The pastry is nice and thin.
-And nice and thin.
Yeah, it's flaky.
That's a really nice pie.
-[Steph] Oh, thanks.
-Thank you, Steph.
-Well done.
-[Steph] Thank you.
[whispers] Well done.
[Noel] Henry, would you like to bring up
-your vertical pie?
-[Henry] Yes.
[groans]
-[Sandi exclaims]
-[Henry] This is terrifying.
Ooh, sh--
[all laughing]
[Prue] Right.
Well, my first feeling is,
basically, you've stacked
one pie on top of another...
-Okay.
-...which is a bit unimaginative.
Putting dried leaves on top of a pie
is never a good idea.
It just doesn't look good.
But let's look at
one of the pies, shall we?
[Paul clears throat]
-[Prue chuckles]
-[Sandi] What's that face?
[Paul sighs]
What am I gonna say, Henry?
My pastry is a little thick.
-[Paul] "A little thick"?
-[Prue chuckles]
-It's a lot thick.
-[Henry] Okay.
So much so that you've got
rawness in there as well.
You needed that paper-thin.
It is very dry.
If you'd used a fattier meat,
-you'd have got a better result.
-[Henry] Okay.
It's bone-dry.
What's happened is all the moisture's
come out the hole at the top.
It's a shame.
That's quite thick as well, isn't it?
Do you know what it tastes like?
Mince pie.
-[Prue] Hmm.
-[chuckles]
You're not getting a lot of chocolate.
You're not getting the pecan.
I'm getting more Christmas flavours
coming through.
-Do you like Christmas?
-Humbug.
[all laughing]
Erm, the idea's there, Henry,
but not executed
to the best of your ability.
Maddening.
-[Paul] Thank you.
-Thank you.
[exhales sharply]
[Henry] Am I in danger? Yeah.
This leaves me...
inches beneath the guillotine blade.
[Rosie] It's probably
the hardest one to call,
in terms of who's going home.
Also one of the hardest points
in the competition to leave, so,
it's gonna be horrific.
I'm not gonna lie,
if it's me, I'll be gutted.
-[duck quacking]
We didn't try anything,
but it was a visual feast.
Unfortunately, that's where it stopped.
-Ah.
-[laughs]
[Prue] It was so disappointing.
[Noel] That horrible word
kept creeping back in.
-"Dry".
-[Prue] Dry.
The only one that got it right was Steph.
She's come from very middle ground
to put herself in line for Star Baker.
David must be up there for Star Baker
because he came first in the Technical...
And his design was amazing.
Let's look at who we're worried about.
The one I was, I suppose,
most disappointed by is Henry.
The dryness and the thickness
of the pastry.
It was just so disappointing,
was it not, as a design?
[Prue] Yes, he just stacked a few pies,
one on top of another,
said it's an upside-down chandelier,
and that's the theme.
Even though he did well in his Signature,
he struggled with the Technical,
and he struggled with this as well.
I imagine we're worried about Rosie.
You didn't particularly
like her Signature.
No, it didn't look particularly good.
[Paul] And the Showstopper,
she struggled a bit.
The design was probably one of the best,
but it was very, very dry.
The whole thing just fell to pieces.
I think they're both in trouble.
To come this far,
it's a terrible point in the competition
to go out, isn't it?
Well done, my lovely bakers.
This is the moment we find out
who is going through to the semifinal.
I can tell you that one person
who definitely is,
is the Star Baker of this week,
and that person is...
Steph.
[Henry] Oh, my darling.
That means I've got
the horrible, horrible job
of announcing which baker is going home.
The baker who's leaving us this week is...
Henry.
[Prue] Oh, Henry.
Oh, my darling.
I met Paul outside the Bake Off tent
when I was 12.
I remember shaking his hand.
[Paul] Unlucky, mate.
[Henry] And I never thought
it would get to a stage
where I was standing behind
one of the benches in there,
actually baking.
I think you struggled a bit today.
-Just a bit. [laughs]
-[Paul] Yeah.
I think he's done a great job, overall,
and he has improved.
I just think, overall,
the other four are better.
It has been a pleasure, darling.
Henry!
Oh, darling Rosie.
[Rosie] Really, really sad
to see Henry go.
Henry is awesome. He's great.
But so happy to still be here.
-[Prue] Well done.
-Thank you.
[Prue] Rosie's still not
believing her luck.
[laughing]
[speaking indistinctly]
What?
Oh, wow. Wow, wow, wow.
And pastry!
Well done, Steph-Steph.
Steph's Showstopper was faultless.
I could not find a single thing
to complain on.
Is this real? [chuckles]